docs(oep): proposal for local bind volumes (#3792) (#3801)
openebs/openebs: designs/helm-charts/local-bind-volumes.md

> # Title: OpenEBS Enhancement Proposal for Mayastor Local Feature
> 
> ### OEP Number: <To be assigned>
> ### Title: Reintroduction of Local Feature in Mayastor for Single-Replica Volumes
> ### Authors: @todeb
> ### Status: Proposed
> ### Created: 2024-11-07
> ### Last Updated: 2024-11-07
> ### Target Release: ?
> 
> ---

Reviewer: We can set as provisional since it's in PR.
It can also be merged as many times as you wish whilst provisional

```suggestion
---
oep-number: Issue also needs to be created
title: OpenEBS Enhancement Proposal for Mayastor Local Feature
authors:
  - "@todeb"
owners:
  - "@todeb"
  - "@tiagolobocastro"
editor: TBD
creation-date: 2024-11-07
last-updated: 2024-11-07
status: provisional
---

# OpenEBS Enhancement Proposal for Mayastor Local Feature
```

3. Users can configure the local behavior using a `local` flag, which can be set or unset via `kubectl-mayastor` commands.

By implementing these features, the local configuration improves performance and resilience in environments without dedicated storage nodes.

## 2. Motivation

In clusters that do not have dedicated storage nodes, keeping application pods on the same node as their Mayastor volumes is essential. While `volumeBindingMode: WaitForFirstConsumer` is intended to ensure that volumes are created on the same node as their consuming pods, it does not always work as expected with Mayastor volumes. Reintroducing the `local` feature with this proposal enforces both local provisioning and node-level affinity for single-replica volumes, thereby avoiding cross-node data access and potential latency or availability issues.

## 3. Goals

- Implement the local feature for single-replica volumes in Mayastor, ensuring that PVs are created on the same node as their consuming pods when `volumeBindingMode: WaitForFirstConsumer` is used.
- Prevent pods from being rescheduled to nodes where the associated volume does not exist.

> - Allow users to set or unset the `local` flag for a volume through `kubectl-mayastor`, providing flexibility and administrative control.

Reviewer: What if you set `local` on an existing volume, residing on node_x and existing pod residing on node_y?
What would be the expected behaviour? The pod consuming the volume would be moved only after existing pod is deleted? (assuming it's some kind of replica set and not a plain Pod without a controller)

Author: Do nothing, is up to user to rollout restart or delete pod and kubernetes scheduler will reshedule it then with affinity to local volume.

Reviewer 2: How do we set PV affinity to existing volumes? The affinity is immutable in the PV. Also for a local:true volume, even if we set local to false, once PV affinity is set the application cannot be rescheduled to a new node. So how does the unset flow work?

Author: right that might be the issue, possible options I see:
- get rid of the unset, once volume is created cannot be changed.
- delete pv definition retaining data and recreate the new pv
- make a volume replica with openebs.io/csi-node in [mayastor] affinity, and delete original volume

Author: unset is not mandatory to be implemented for this, but could be nice to have add on.
3rd point right, it doesn't make any sense as the pv definition has the nodeaffinity and not the mayastor itself, so making more replicas of volume won't change anything in that case.

Reviewer: > 3rd point right, it doesn't make any sense 

ok...
Not sure where "making more replicas" is coming from?
My point here is that with a custom scheduler you don't need to use the CSI topology feature, at all. 
At the cost of having to maintain a custom scheduler, which we might want to avoid..

Reviewer: oh I see, your 3rd point, right yes I think replicas won't help here.
Anyways my suggestion is to keep this simple, and remove the ability to modify the local for now, that perhaps can be tackled on separate oep?

## 4. Non-Goals

- This proposal does not implement the local feature for multi-replica volumes, as cross-node replication complicates strict local binding.

> - The local feature is specific to Mayastor and does not apply to other OpenEBS engines, such as Jiva or cStor.

Reviewer: I think you can leave Jiva and cStor out, as they're no longer OpenEBS engines (they're archived)

## 7. Implementation Details

### Design

- **Local Flag Parameter**: 
  - Add a `local` flag to the volume specification. When `local: true` is set, Mayastor enforces both local provisioning and anti-rescheduling of single-replica volumes.
  - `kubectl-mayastor` commands can be used to set or unset the `local` flag for active volumes, dynamically controlling local binding.

- **Single-Replica Volume Constraint**: 
  - This feature applies only to volumes configured with one replica, as multi-replica configurations may require cross-node replication.
  - If additional replicas are added, the `local` flag is automatically disabled, and cross-node rescheduling may occur.

- **Affinity Management**:
  - Node affinity rules are applied to the volume based on the `local` flag setting, ensuring that the pod and volume remain co-located.

>   - Kubernetes will use these affinity rules to restrict rescheduling to the initial node only.

Reviewer: Do these rules help with `Immediate` binding mode? Also can they be modified after initial creation? (since local flag is intended to be modifiable via plugin)

Author: local flag is intended to be set in storageclass, and also be modified via plugin.
If volume is created with Immediate and local, then volume can be created on random node and set with proper affinity. K8S scheduler will then schedule pod on specific node.
```
Node Affinity:
  Required Terms:
    Term 0:        openebs.io/csi-node in [mayastor]
```
```
Node Affinity:
  Required Terms:
    Term 0:        openebs.io/nodename=node1
```

Reviewer: I see, it kinda reverses the initial step, so basically:
`WaitForFirsConsumer`: brings storage to node where pod is first scheduled on
`Immediate`: brings pod to the node where mayastor chooses to place the replica

Author: yes, and what is the confusion or reverse?

Reviewer: It's clear for me now, just wanted to highlight this difference, which I think is important.
